JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Donald Trump's attack on the
integrity of
U.S. elections has both
Democrats and Republicans
coming to the defense of a
pillar of democracy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Then: a ground
report from
swing state North Carolina --
how Americans
struggling with poverty in rural
areas view
this election.
MARK TRUDELL, North Carolina: I
mean, if they
came down here and saw how
people are actually
living in rural America, then
maybe they would
change it.
Maybe they would do something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
surprising split over
a proposed carbon tax in
Seattle, Washington,
putting residents in a dead heat
over how
to keep the state green.
MICHAEL BRUNE, Executive
Director, Sierra
Club: Two of the biggest
challenges we face
in this country are climate
change and economic
inequality.
If we pit one of those
challenges against
the other, neither will be
successful.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: On this day
after the final
debate, Donald Trump is at the
center of a
political storm again.
It blew up last night with his
refusal to
say he'd acknowledge next
month's outcome.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I will totally accept the
results of this
great and historic presidential
election,
if I win.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Donald Trump
in Delaware,
Ohio, today, stirring the pot
again on what
happens if he loses.
DONALD TRUMP: Of course, I would
accept a
clear election result, but I
would also reserve
my right to contest or file a
legal challenge
in the case of a questionable
result.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All of that
after the nominee
touched off a furor during his
final debate
with Hillary Clinton.
CHRIS WALLACE, Moderator: Are
you saying you're
not prepared now to commit to
that principle?
DONALD TRUMP: What I'm saying is
that I will
tell you at the time.
I will keep you in suspense.
OK?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, Chris, let me respond to
that, because
that's horrifying.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Clinton went
further post-debate
while flying from Las Vegas
early this morning.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: So, what
he said tonight
is part of his whole effort to
blame somebody
else for his campaign and for
where he stands
in this election.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump also got
pushback
from fellow Republicans,
including John Thune,
the number three Republican in
the Senate.
He said all such talk -- quote
-- "undermines
an electoral system that is a
model for nations
around the world."
Another Republican senator, Bob
Corker, who
has campaigned with Trump,
tweeted: "It is
imperative that Donald Trump
clearly state
that he will accept the
results."
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell declined
comment today.
And House Speaker Paul Ryan's
office said
he is fully confident the states
will carry
out this election with
integrity.
And, late today, President Obama
weighed in,
stumping for Clinton in Miami.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
That is not a joking matter.
No, no, no, I want everybody to
pay attention
here.
That is dangerous, because when
you try to
sow the seeds of doubt in
people's minds about
the legitimacy of our elections,
that undermines
our democracy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile, in
New York,
another woman came forward to
accuse Donald
Trump of groping her.
Karena Virginia says it happened
in New York
in 1998.
And Trump today accused Clinton
of political
cheating.
He cited a hacked e-mail that
showed she was
tipped about a death penalty
question during
a primary season town hall.
DONALD TRUMP: That is cheating
at the highest
level.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As for last
night's final
face-off, early ratings show
about 68 million
Americans watched, more than the
second debate,
but far fewer than the first.
Tonight, both candidates share a
stage again,
this time, at the gala Al Smith
Dinner in
New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: A
Russia-Syrian humanitarian pause
took effect
in Syria in the besieged city of
Aleppo.
It could run as long as four
days.
Using loudspeakers, the Syrian
military urged
residents to leave and gunmen to
lay down
their weapons.
The Syrian army also dropped
leaflets.
But the U.N.'s special envoy
said he doubts
the effort will work.
STAFFAN DE MISTURA, Special
United Nations
Envoy for Syria: Certainly, my
feeling is
that, from what I'm hearing,
that the people
do not want to leave their
places.
They do not want to become
refugees.
They want to stay in their
place.
But they do request, stop the
bombings, which
needs to be, by the way, from
both sides.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, a
separate fight
north of Aleppo.
Turkey attacked Syrian Kurds
who've been fighting
Islamic State forces.
Military footage showed
airstrikes on Kurdish
fighters linked to a group the
U.S. supports.
Turkey says they're also tied to
militants
fighting the Turkish government.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Iraq, the
battle for
Mosul claimed its first American
casualty,
a soldier killed by a roadside
bomb.
U.S. forces are advising Iraqis
in their campaign
to retake the city from the
Islamic State.
First, they have to capture
outlying towns.
And John Irvine of Independent
Television
News reports on the harrowing
trip of one
such unit.
JOHN IRVINE: A new day brought a
fresh assault,
and taking the fight I.S. for
the first time,
where Iraq special forces came
to quickly
make their mark.
The attack was a pincer
movement, and we were
in the lead vehicle with a team
of (INAUDIBLE)
who had to find safe passage
through the land
mines.
Two led the way on foot, but
soon came under
sniper fire.
A gunship was called in.
The sniping was ended.
The explosives experts called
for a tank to
join them before leaving the
Kalamoff (ph)
Road and on to the safer ground
that is the
countryside.
We were venturing into the
so-called caliphate,
and the Iraqi forces put down a
lot of suppressing
fire.
But the telltale pings on our
vehicle indicated
that I.S. were still putting up
a night.
We're coming under sniper fire
and firing
back.
That's the problem with being in
the lead
vehicle in an offensive which
right now is
pretty slow-going.
Later, the special forces fired
on a saloon
car which had overturned
speeding down a road.
When nothing happened, we
wondered if the
driver had been an innocent just
trying to
flee the battlefield.
No, he was a suicide bomber who
had missed
us.
We were just glad that, at the
end of the
day, all of us and our battered
vehicle had
come through.
Only, it wasn't the end of the
day -- a fourth
car bomb attack on the convoy.
Mosul is still a few days away
for Iraqi forces,
and the closer they get, the
harder it will
become.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There are
5,000 U.S. troops
in Iraq.
About 100 are embedded with
Iraqi and Kurdish
forces around Mosul.
We will talk later to retired
General David
Petraeus.
He commanded U.S. troops in
Mosul in 2003.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. military
confirms
that North Korea test-fired
another ballistic
missile overnight, but it
crashed shortly
after launch.
That's the second failed test
since Saturday.
It came hours after the U.S. and
South Korea
agreed to strengthen military
and diplomatic
efforts against the North.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The president
of the Philippines,
Rodrigo Duterte, announced today
what he calls
a separation from the U.S.
Duterte spoke in
Beijing after meeting with
Chinese President
Xi Jinping and signing a major
commercial
deal.
Afterward, he said that in
military and economic
terms, America has lost.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President: Maybe
I will also go to Russia to talk
to Putin
and tell him that there are
three of us against
the world, China, Philippines
and Russia.
(APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Duterte also
said he will
work with Xi to settle their
maritime dispute
in the South China Sea.
In Washington, the State
Department called
the comments baffling and said
it will seek
an explanation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A super typhoon
blasted the
Northern Philippines overnight
with winds
of 140 miles an hour.
It was the most powerful storm
to hit the
country in three years, but the
death toll
of seven was far lower than
feared.
The storm did trigger flooding,
landslides
and power outages.
Nearly 100,000 people had been
evacuated ahead
of time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The European
Space Agency
now says its latest Mars lander
may have crashed.
Ground controllers lost contact
with the experimental
probe yesterday as it dropped
toward the surface.
Animation showed how the lander
was supposed
to use a parachute and thrusters
to make a
soft landing.
Europe's last attempt at a Mars
landing also
failed back in 2003.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street,
stocks closed
lower, giving up yesterday's
modest gains.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 40 points
to close at 18162.
The Nasdaq fell four, and the
S&P 500 slipped
nearly three.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And for wine
lovers, it's
a case of sour grapes.
A global survey out today finds
this year's
production is the lowest since
2012.
Floods, drought and other bad
weather took
a toll across Europe and South
America.
Wine output in the U.S. actually
went up slightly.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
an in-depth
look at some of the key moments
from last
night's debate; rural voters
feeling abandoned
by today's politicians; General
David Petraeus'
take on the fight in Mosul;
Washington state
divided over a tax on carbon
pollution; and
much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we heard
earlier, Donald
Trump continued to suggest today
that he might
not accept the results of the
November election
if he doesn't win.
But should he lose, could Trump
legally challenge
the results?
And how would that process work?
To examine some of these
questions, we are
joined now by Chris Ashby.
He's a Republican election
lawyer.
And Beverly Gage, she's
professor of American
history at Yale University.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Beverly Gage, to you first.
Have we ever seen anything quite
like this
before?
BEVERLY GAGE, Yale University:
We have not
seen anything like this before,
Judy.
There have been contested
elections in the
past.
And those are often close
elections, where,
once the results are in, they
seem uncertain,
and so you have a variety of
appeals.
But we have never had a major
party candidate
say this far in advance that the
only legitimate
outcome of only an election is
his own victory.
That is unprecedented.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, as you say,
we have had
contested elections after the
fact.
And we certainly -- everyone who
is at least
of a certain age remembers 2000,
Bush v. Gore.
But there have been others in
American history,
haven't there?
BEVERLY GAGE: Right, there have
been contested
elections and really fiercely
fought elections
with a lot of bad feelings
almost since the
beginning of the republic.
What those have always produced
is, with one
pretty big exception, is the
peaceful transition
of power.
That exception, of course, is
1860, where
much of the white South said
that they wouldn't
accept Abraham Lincoln's
election as president,
and we got the Civil War as a
result.
But with that pretty big
exception, everyone,
despite challenges, has
ultimately come around.
Other than 2000, probably the
famous one in
recent memory was 1960, which
was this squeaker
of an election between Kennedy
and Nixon,
in which Nixon to some degree
challenged the
election, but himself stepped
aside.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we know there
was a dispute
about that one.
Chris Ashby, let me just play
devil's advocate
here, because what Donald Trump
is saying
-- and he said this today -- he
said, I want
to reserve the right to file a
challenge in
case of a questionable result.
Is that not a reasonable thing
for him to
do?
CHRIS ASHBY, GOP Campaign
Lawyer: No, it's
not because it's a statement of
the obvious.
He doesn't waive his right.
He doesn't need to claim that
right now.
What he should do is say what
every major,
indeed every presidential
candidate before
him has said, which is, I will
accept the
outcome.
And then, after the election, if
there is
some evidence that an election
of electors
in a particular state was
tainted by fraud,
then he could pursue that.
But by saying it now, he's
undermining the
legitimacy of this election and
the individuals
who it elects.
And it's very dangerous and it's
destructive
to the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
for a moment
about what would it take to
trigger a challenge.
How off would the results have
to be in order
to -- for there to be warranted
a legitimate
challenge to the results?
®MD-BO /CHRIS ASHBY: Well, the
standard here
in a challenge would be a
significant number
of votes that could be proven,
right?
You can't just say that there
was generally
fraud.
You have to know how many votes
either from
fraud or by mistake.
And it has to be enough votes to
cover the
margin between the candidates.
And so, if you think that you
have to go out
and actually get this evidence,
you have to
find voters, you have to
election records,
and you have to quantify this,
and you have
to do it in a time period of
about a month.
The election would have to be
pretty close
in order for them to have any
chance of quantifying
a difference between the two
candidates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when you say
pretty close,
how close do you mean?
®MD-BO /CHRIS ASHBY: Maybe a few
hundred,
maybe in the low thousands of
folks.
And even that would be a high
bar.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're talking
state by
state.
®MD-BO /CHRIS ASHBY: That's
right, because
the contest is not of the
presidential election.
It's of the electors.
And that happens in 51 different
states and
the District of Columbia.
And so you are bringing a
contest to the election
of the electors.
And you would have to bring
enough state contests
to cover the difference in the
Electoral College.
And if this election heads the
way that it
appears that it's heading, that
could be hundreds
of electoral votes that we need
to swing in
a contest decided by multiple
states at once.
It's a very, very high bar.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Beverly Gage,
back to what
we have seen historically in
American elections,
what's an example of a time when
-- I mean,
you can talk about 1960, 2000.
I mean, dig a little bit deeper
into what
it would take to trigger
something and then
to pursue it.
BEVERLY GAGE: Right.
Well, one thing to note about
the 20th century,
for the most part, we haven't
had particularly
close presidential elections.
So, Chris is right, that it
would need to
be incredibly close for anything
like this
to happen.
And that's actually fairly
unusual, though
we have gotten a little bit more
used to it
in recent years.
So, 1960 was really a razor-thin
count.
And, at that point, Nixon didn't
concede overnight,
but he did concede in the
morning.
The Republican Party itself,
however, went
ahead and challenged various
election results
in states like Illinois, in
Texas.
Sometimes, that was through the
courts.
Sometimes, that was through
recounts.
But there was never any truth
that there had
been any fraud significant
enough to change
the outcome of the election.
And Nixon himself actually
always took it
as a point of political pride
that, though
he harbored a heavy heart in
that moment,
he in fact conceded to Kennedy
for the good
of the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Chris Ashby,
let's talk
for a moment about 2004, Ohio,
John Kerry.
The Democrats challenged some of
how that
state, the state of Ohio came
out.
It went for Bush in 2004, but
there were questions
raised.
®MD-BO /CHRIS ASHBY: Sure.
And they raised those questions
in Congress,
and Congress disposed of those
questions pretty
quickly.
In the absence of some kind of
compelling
evidence of fraud or of mistakes
in the conduct
of the election that affects the
outcome,
I just don't see people having
much patience
or time for this type of a
challenge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other
question, Chris Ashby
-- and we have discussed this on
the program
earlier this week -- Donald
Trump is saying
to his supporters -- and he's
said this in
several different parts of the
country -- you
need to go and watch what's
happening at polling
places.
What would that mean, if that
happened?
®MD-BO /CHRIS ASHBY: Well, that's
a very
dangerous situation, because, in
most states,
they're not going to be allowed
in.
Most states require poll
watchers to have
some sort of credential, some
type of training
and potentially understanding of
the process
that they're observing.
Even in those states where any
member of the
public can walk in and observe,
they're not
going to get anywhere near a
voter, anywhere
near a poll booth, anywhere near
an election
official.
And if they try to interfere
with the conduct
of the election, they're going
to be removed.
And when they either can't get
in or are taken
out, I think that's just going
to feed right
into the suspicion that led them
there in
the first place.
And now you play this out in
polling places
across the country, and you
broadcast it on
the news, and it gets picked up
on the Internet,
it's a very, very flammable
situation on Election
Day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, Beverly
Gage, remind
us what it means in our
democracy that we
are able to count on and respect
the results
of our elections.
BEVERLY GAGE: One of the most
important things
really since our founding has
been the peaceful
transition of power.
It is something that every
president has really
prided himself on.
And if you think back to the
founders, those
were people with a living memory
of revolution.
They had seen it in Europe.
They had experienced it
themselves, and they
understood that it was
absolutely critical
to affirm the electoral system
and to see
that power could pass
peacefully.
And it was one of the great
points of pride
for the country and has been
almost always
ever since.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is
another moment
for us to think about that and
remember what
it does mean for our country and
for our system
of government.
Beverly Gage, Chris Ashby, we
thank you both.
®MD-BO /CHRIS ASHBY: Thank you.
BEVERLY GAGE: Thanks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Unlike the
first two debates,
last night, we heard a lot more
about policy
from both candidates.
Here to help break them down is
our own Lisa
Desjardins.
One of the first exchanges that
was substantive
was about Supreme Court nominee
decisions
that these -- one of these two
presidents,
in whoever wins, would have and
what kind
of impact that person would have
in the courts
and on cases like Roe v. Wade.
Here's a clip.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Based on what she's saying, and
based on where
she's going, and where she's
been, you can
take the baby and rip the baby
out of the
womb in the ninth month on the
final day.
And that's not acceptable.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How many
late-term abortions
are there?
Because it usually gets
distilled down into
these worse-case scenarios.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
is really a good -- the best
resource we have
for these kinds of statistics.
But we only know after 21 weeks.
Here's what they say.
In the U.S., roughly 1.3 percent
of all abortions
happen after 21 weeks.
That's considered late term, but
it's still
the middle of the second
trimester.
That translates into about 6,100
abortions.
That was in 2012.
That is out of almost 700,000.
So it's a small percentage.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What is
Hillary Clinton's
position on this?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
She says that she would favor
restrictions
in the third trimester on
abortion, but only
if the life of the mother or
health of the
mother was considered.
That's specifically her policy.
It has been consistent.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And then what
about that
larger context that Donald Trump
and Hillary
Clinton was asked about what
happens If justices
get appointed that overturn Roe
v. Wade?
What happens next?
LISA DESJARDINS: This is where
it gets really
fascinating.
It is thought by most legal
scholars that
it would return to the states,
that state
law would take over abortion.
And we know right now there are
states that
have laws on the books saying if
Roe vs. Wade
is overturned, they would make
abortion unlawful.
Other states would increase
restrictions.
But there's a real question over
whether the
next president will have enough
seats on the
court to in fact overturn Roe
vs. Wade.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there was
also another
exchange about nuclear arms and
kind of the
race with Russia.
Let's take a listen.
DONALD TRUMP: We have a country
with tremendous
numbers of nuclear warheads --
1,800, by the
way -- where they expanded and
we didn't,
1,800 nuclear warheads.
And she's playing chicken.
We are so outplayed on missiles,
on cease-fires.
They are outplayed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, I think
both sides would
agree that there's not going to
be a winner
in a nuclear war around the
world.
But why does this numbers games
matter?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right, 1,800,
he's saying.
And he's talking about strategic
deployed
nuclear weapons by Russia.
And let's look real quick at
where we are,
just as some background.
Right now, in 2016, Russia has
about 1,735
deployed nuclear strategic
nuclear weapons.
Those are basically
ready-to-launch weapons.
The U.S., 1,481 -- that's from
the Arms Control
Association.
And here's the thing, Hari, is
that those
numbers are misleading, because
both countries
are under a treaty.
By 2018, both countries have to
have less
than 1,550.
Both Russia and the U.S. right
now are decreasing
their nuclear arsenals.
These matter for strategic and
political reasons
both.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so aren't
all nukes
the same?
And what's the decrease --
what's the cause
in the decrease besides the
treaty?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Not all nukes are the same.
But we talked to one expert who
counts the
nukes and knows the different
types of nukes,
and says, overall, you step away
from all
of the details, what matters
here is the difference
in numbers between the U.S. and
Russia really
doesn't matter in terms of the
amount of number
of nuclear weapons.
The size of these arsenals are
so huge, they
can do tremendous damage.
Difference of a few hundred
nukes is not great.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's also a
clip here
I want to play.
Chris Wallace brought up a
revelation from
WikiLeaks which tried to
highlight the discrepancy
between Hillary Rodham Clinton's
public positions
on immigration and an excerpt
from a speech
that she gave.
Let's take a listen.
CHRIS WALLACE, Moderator: Is
that your dream,
open borders?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, if you went on to read the
rest of the
sentence, I was talking about
energy.
You know, we trade more energy
with our neighbors
than we trade with the rest of
the world combined.
LISA DESJARDINS: And, you know,
this is a
sentence that was just one -- a
couple of
sentences.
We don't have the full speech.
That's the problem here.
We don't know what Hillary
Clinton was saying
before she talked about open
borders.
Was she talking about
immigration or was she
talking about energy, as she
claimed?
We can look at a few other
excerpts we have
here and there from that speech,
Hari.
She did talk about energy a lot
in that speech.
She also talked about trade.
We don't know that she talked
about immigration.
But this is a problem, because
Hillary Clinton
has not released the full
transcript of that
speech.
We don't know for sure what she
was talking
about when she said open
borders.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
this was your
assignment for today, but since
the election
is so close, we have got you
working on lots
of different things.
And, as part of our Chasing the
Dream series,
you just recently went out to
rural North
Carolina.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And out there, we found a large
group of people
and a very large issue that the
truth is the
campaigns have nearly ignored.
It is a place rich in landscapes
and in spirit,
fiercely proud of its
Appalachian heritage.
But amid that beauty and
strength, the towns
of Western North Carolina are
struggling,
and many feel no one is
listening.
MARK TRUDELL, North Carolina: I
don't have
a savings.
It is pretty much paycheck to
paycheck.
DARLA DIETZ, North Carolina And
I don't think
politicians realize how many of
us.
This is the face of poverty.
LESLIE DIETZ, North Carolina:
They don't understand
that there are people that
actually try to
get by and honestly make a
living, and they
automatically assume the worst.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's a
conversation happening
far outside of Washington.
As the economy slowly improves
in many places,
here in Wilkes County, at the
edge of the
Blue Ridge Mountains, by many
accounts, times
are getting tougher.
Wilkes saw median income plunge
30 percent
since the year 2000 down to
$33,000 per household.
That's the second steepest drop
in wealth
in the nation.
NARRATOR: Every day is Saturday
in these thriving
mountain towns.
LISA DESJARDINS: This was
Wilkesboro, the
county seat, in 1948, then a
prosperous mountain
town with bustling shops, a
booming furniture
industry and thriving
agriculture.
But now 23.4 percent of people
here live in
poverty.
That's well above the national
rate of 14.5
percent.
What does poverty mean?
An individual making just under
$12,000 a
year.
Here, the poultry industry is
one of the few
remaining large employers.
Tyson Foods employs 2,600 people
across the
county.
Mark Trudell welcomed us to his
new home,
a trailer he and his wife, Peggy
(ph), just
moved into and are in the
process of fixing
up.
MARK TRUDELL: We shop at the
thrift stores,
the habitat restore, and, if
it's broke, I
fix it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mark works
stocking shelves
at a grocery store for minimum
wage, $7.25
an hour.
As his kitchen shows, he is
highly organized.
But he has other skills,
lighting and plumbing.
He helps his neighbors for free,
but he has
little security for himself.
MARK TRUDELL: I have never ever,
ever in my
life drawn unemployment, even
though I was
entitled to it, I paid into it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Fifty-year-old
Darla Dietz
lives in a home she rents with
her husband,
Terry (ph).
Terry is 52 years old, but a
degenerative
brain disease is eroding his
mind now to the
capacity of a 3-year-old.
That makes Darla his full-time
caregiver,
bathing him, making his meals,
constantly
watching him.
DARLA DIETZ: He doesn't know how
many children
we have, their ages.
It's very hard when you have a
history with
somebody for so long, and yet
you're the only
with the memories.
LISA DESJARDINS: The couple live
off Terry's
disability check, $1,234 a
month.
DARLA DIETZ: I'm out of benefits
right now,
so, this week, it's go to a food
pantry.
It's hope I sell a pair of
earrings.
It's getting with my
daughter-in-law.
Hey, what do you have?
What do you have?
And that's life.
LISA DESJARDINS: The earrings
and jewelry
Darla sells sometimes determine
if she will
have gas for the car or diapers
for her husband.
Getting to our next stop was a
challenge up
a steep muddy clay road to
Darla's daughter-in-law's
house.
Leslie Dietz lives with her
husband and three
children in her mother's
trailer.
LESLIE DIETZ: My husband just
started working
again.
My mom, of course, has Social
Security.
She's got COPD.
This is her property, so,
luckily, we have
my mom.
It's been since, I think, last
year that he
was working.
So, it's paycheck to paycheck.
And there are times when he
works, when he
doesn't work, because, like I
said, we get
snowed in, rained in, it's a
hard place to
be at.
LISA DESJARDINS: In rural
America, lack of
transportation, health care
needs and feeling
ignored by politicians are all
reasons the
poor vote less and have less
power.
GENE NICHOL, University of North
Carolina
at Chapel Hill: If we had a
bunch of low-income
Americans in this room, they
would say, why
bother to vote?
They would say, with real
justice, neither
of these parties pays any
attention to the
likes of me.
I'm not going to bother with
politics because
politics doesn't do me any good.
LISA DESJARDINS: Gene Nichol is
a law professor
and poverty expert at the
University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.
GENE NICHOL: In the United
States, with the
system we have, it's a little
closer to $1
one vote than it is to one
person one vote.
So, low-income people are
already disadvantaged
in that skewed system.
And then low-income people
frequently have
that tradition of participating
less often,
less vigorously.
LISA DESJARDINS: The gap between
voters and
nonvoters breaks down strongly
along class
lines.
In the 2012 presidential
election, 80.2 percent
of those making more than
$150,000 voted,
but only 46.9 percent of those
making less
than $10,000 voted.
We asked Darla, Leslie, and Mark
if they think
candidates are taking them into
consideration
this election year.
DARLA DIETZ: I don't think they
realize that
there's this class of people who
are able-bodied.
What I would give for a
full-time job and
benefits.
We typically think of poverty to
be a demographic
that you normally associate with
downtown
areas and -- but this is it too.
And they don't see that.
LESLIE DIETZ: I hear one talking
about taking
care of our children, and I hear
one say giving
us jobs.
Do I think they're really going
to do it?
No.
LISA DESJARDINS: Do you think
they're talking
about you?
LESLIE DIETZ: No.
MARK TRUDELL: I haven't heard
anything come
out of a politician's mouth that
would help
us in a very long time.
I mean, if they came down here
and saw how
people are actually living in
rural America,
then maybe they would change it.
Maybe they would do something.
But the infrastructure of the
country is falling
apart.
And there's mass amounts of
money that could
be put in redoing it and giving
people work
to do it.
But they don't see it.
They don't -- they don't come
down here and
look at this.
LISA DESJARDINS: Donald Trump
has made campaign
stops in rural parts of the
country, including
one in nearby Statesville, North
Carolina,
in August.
But unlike his rival, Hillary
Clinton, he
doesn't have a specific plan to
combat rural
poverty.
She does.
But neither candidate gives
poverty the attention
of earlier decades, like 1964,
when President
Lyndon Johnson went on a poverty
tour before
launching his war on poverty, or
1968, when
then presidential candidate
Robert F. Kennedy
made his own two-day trip to
investigate poverty
in Appalachia.
Gene Nichol says Americans have
learned to
turn their eyes away from
poverty.
GENE NICHOL: We go about our
daily lives without
thinking about it.
Maybe there's economic
hardships, but it's
on the other side of town or the
other side
of the county, or, here, the
other side of
state.
Maybe the hardship is even so
pronounced,
that it gives the lie to our
claims of equal
dignity and opportunity.
But we never see it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mark Trudell
hasn't thought
of voting as an opportunity in a
long time.
But that has changed.
He just registered to vote, and
plans to cast
his first ballot since voting
for Ross Perot
in 1992.
Darla Dietz, she's going to try
to make it
to a polling place on Election
Day, if she
can get someone to take care of
her husband.
And for Leslie Dietz, she says
politicians
offer her nothing, and she turns
to faith
instead.
We saw her teaching Sunday
school, a lesson
about biblical leader Moses.
For her, it's a question of
morality.
LESLIE DIETZ: I kind of feel
strongly about
teaching them in Sunday school,
because I
can make sure that they know the
difference
between right and wrong, what's
moral, what's
ethical, you know?
And I really don't want to get
involved in
something that I think is
unethical.
LISA DESJARDINS: So, she has no
plans to vote
this November for either
candidate running
for president.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins
in Wilkes County, North
Carolina.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back to the
campaign.
Late today, Politico is
reporting the latest
shakeup in Donald Trump's
effort.
The national political director
is stepping
down, citing personal reasons.
The battle for Mosul is the most
important
of the two-year campaign against
ISIS in Iraq,
and a defeat there would be a
crippling setback
for the extremists.
We turn now to a man with
detailed knowledge
of the city and its ethnic and
sectarian crosscurrents.
Retired General David Petraeus
was in charge
of the 101st Airborne Division
in Mosul in
2003.
He went on to command the entire
multinational
force in Iraq and also served as
the top general
for U.S. Central Command.
He also ran NATO and American
operations in
Afghanistan.
And, from 2011 to 2012, he
served as director
of the CIA.
He joins me now from New York.
General Petraeus, thank you for
being with
us.
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS (RET.), Former
Commander, U.S.
Central Command: Good to be with
you, Judy.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, last night at
the debate,
Donald Trump again criticized
the Obama administration
for telegraphing ahead of time
the plan to
go into Mosul.
Does Donald Trump have a point
about not letting
the enemy know what you're going
to do?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: What is going on
here is,
in a sense, a distinction
between so-called
strategic surprise, which is not
possible
when you're moving tens of
thousands of troops
and thousands of vehicles and
logistics and
everything else, and then
tactical surprise,
which I think probably was
achieved to some
degree when the Iraqi forces
launched the
original operation several days
ago, and actually
has continued, as they have
opened new offensives,
if you will, from the north and
the northeast,
in addition to those in the
initial day, which
came from the south and from the
southeast
and east.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
the challenges
that the Iraqi military and its
allies, including
the U.S., face in Mosul?
You know that area well.
Clearly, it's changed since the
takeover by
ISIS.
But what do you think they're
confronting?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: Well, first, of
course, they're
confronting what would be a
tough fight in
a city that's several times
larger than any
that they have cleared so far
over the course
of the last two years, since we
helped them
reconstitute their forces,
reequip, and retrain
and remand them, and then as we
have enabled
them so impressively, frankly,
with this armada
of manned and unmanned aerial
vehicles, precision-strike
assets and intelligence fusion,
as well as
obviously advising and assisting
them.
And they will encounter a tough,
tough city
fight.
Urban operations are inherently
difficult.
The enemy has been there for a
couple of years,
has dug tunnel systems, trenches
filled with
oil that they will torch to try
to obscure
our optics.
They will use snipers.
And every single house, every
single neighborhood
has to be cleared.
And this is a population that
used to be,
in our day, when I was
privileged to command
the 101st Airborne Division, in
Mosul and
Nineveh province, which Mosul
Islamist capital,
some two million people.
It's down probably to about 1.2
million now.
Some of those will leave and go
to the refugees
centers that have been set up to
take care
of them during the course of the
battle.
But many will also stay.
And some will be trapped and
kept there by
the Islamic State, used
essentially as human
shields, announcement
complicating factor
for the Iraqi security forces,
the Kurdish
Peshmerga, and indeed for our
elements that
are supporting them in this
fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I do want to
ask you about
the challenges that the Iraqis
face even assuming
Mosul is cleared of ISIS.
But, first, are you confident
that they will
be able to get ISIS out of
Mosul?
And do you think it could take
as long as
a year, which the head of
Central Command
has said that it might?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: No, I think --
with respect,
I think he said it could take
months, I think.
Understandably, he's giving a
bit of the worst-case
analysis.
It's already moving faster than
most predicted.
I have said that, look, the
Islamic State
fighters that are left in Mosul,
maybe as
many as 5,000 or 6,000, they
realize that
they are dead men walking.
There's no question that the
Iraqi security
forces, with all of the enablers
that we're
providing them, are going to
clear that city.
That's not in question.
The only question is, how long
do the Islamic
State fighters really put up
resistance?
There are reports already of
substantial numbers
of deserters, many of whom have
been executed,
and of leaders trying to leave
the city as
well.
In fact, one of the big
questions that is
out there right now is, where is
Baghdadi,
the leader of the Islamic State?
Is he trapped there with one of
his explosives
experts, or did he actually
escape to the
west and try to get back across
the border
to Syria?
But, again, no question that the
Iraqi security
forces will prevail.
The bigger question is actually
the battle
after this.
And I have made clear in writing
a couple
of months ago, for example, that
the most
complex human terrain in all of
Iraq is to
be found in Mosul and the
province of which
it is a capital, Nineveh,
biblical Nineveh.
There are Sunni Arabs in the
majority, but
there are also pockets of Shia
Arabs.
There are Turkmen, Sunni as well
as Shia.
There are Kurds, and they come
from several
political parties that they're
not always
in agreement with each other.
There are sizable numbers of
Christians that
were treated horribly under the
Islamic State
and want to get back to their
areas.
There are Yazidis.
There are Shabak.
And all of these want to get
back from whence
they came, and they want to play
a part in
governance that follows.
And all will want to be
represented and want
that government to be responsive
to them and
guarantee their minority rights,
if they're
not the Sunni Arabs, in addition
to, of course,
the Sunni Arab majority rule.
This is going to be very, very
difficult.
We did achieve it early on in
2003, when I
was privileged to command there.
But we had 28,000 great American
soldiers.
We had 254 helicopters.
And I had the authority of being
an occupying
commander under the Geneva
Convention, and
didn't hesitate, frankly, to use
that authority.
There's no equivalent power
there at this
point in time.
So, this is going to take
intense politics,
intense negotiations and a lot
of individuals
undoubtedly demonstrating the
full range of
emotions along the way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, are you
confident that
the current Iraqi government is
prepared to
do what's necessary to make sure
that Mosul
is stable going forward?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: I'm confident
that they will
do everything they possibly can.
The question is whether,
frankly, that is
going to be enough.
There are going to be enormous
grievances.
There will be scores that some
want to settle.
Even within the sectarian
groupings and ethnic
groupings, there will be
squabbles and disputes.
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi
knows that
the government has to be
inclusive.
He knows that, for Iraq writ
large, the Sunni
Arabs have to be brought back
into the fabric
of society, as we were able to
do during the
surge.
One of the huge accomplishments,
which sadly
was undone some three-and-a-half
years after
the end of the surge by the
previous prime
minister, who took highly
sectarian actions
that inflamed that part of the
population,
allowed the Islamic State to get
back up off
its stomach, and indeed created
fertile fields
for the planting of the seeds of
extremism.
The people now have once again
been acquainted
with that form of extremism.
They want nothing of it.
The people are actually reported
rising up
against the Islamic State in
some of the villages
outside Mosul, and undoubtedly
will do that
in some Mosul neighborhoods as
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
finally,
role for the U.S. in all of this
is?
Is it essential that the U.S.
have a role
here or not?
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: It is essential
that the U.S.
has a role.
And I can assure you that the
new ambassador
there, the new commander on the
ground, both
experienced Iraq hands, both
have multiple
tours there in past years, that
they are keenly
aware that they have to engage
in that, as
is the special presidential
enjoy, Brett McGurk,
who has spent an enormous amount
of time in
Baghdad and Irbil up in the
Kurdish regional
government capital, trying to
help foster
all of this.
But that's the extent of what we
can do.
We can encourage, we can nudge,
we can cajole.
We can't force.
And it is going to have to be
Iraqis at the
end of the day that come
together, recognizing
that, if they cannot, fertile
fields will
be planted for the planting of
the seeds of
ISIS 3.0, of further extremism
in Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: General David
Petraeus, we
thank you very much.
GEN.
DAVID PETRAEUS: Great to be back
with you,
Judy.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One subject
that's gotten less
attention in the national
election is climate
change, but there is a battle
over a carbon
tax ballot initiative in
Washington state
next month.
It would be the first tax of its
kind in the
country.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has the
story for his weekly series,
Making Sense.
YORAM BAUMAN, Founder, Carbon
Washington:
You might be an economist if you
don't read
human interest stories because
they don't
interest you.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: At Seattle's Museum
of Flight
earlier this year, Climate
Night, headlining,
Yoram Bauman, who claims, with a
straight
face, that he's the world's
first and only
economic comic.
YORAM BAUMAN: You might be an
economist if
you have ever gone into a bank
or other financial
institution in the hopes of
getting a date.
(LAUGHTER)
YORAM BAUMAN: If you adamantly
refuse to sell
your children because you think
they will
be worth more later.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: But when we visited
Seattle in
April, Bauman had begun a dead
serious fight,
to combat climate change in his
home state
of Washington by imposing a tax
on carbon
emissions.
He'd founded the grassroots
group Carbon Washington
to put the issue to voters.
MAN: Initiative 732, it's going
to be on the
November ballot.
MAN: I-732 works by charging
polluters with
a carbon fee, which lowers
pollution.
WOMAN: And then the revenue that
is created
will go to reducing other taxes
in the state.
PAUL SOLMAN: Making the carbon
tax, starting
at $25 per ton of CO2, about 25
cents per
gallon of gasoline,
revenue-neutral.
YORAM BAUMAN: The revenue from
the carbon
tax goes to cut existing taxes.
Most of it goes to cut the state
sales tax
by a full percentage point.
Most households are going to pay
a few hundred
dollars a year more for fossil
fuels and a
few hundred dollars a year less
for everything
else.
PAUL SOLMAN: Everyone will pay
the carbon
tax, says Bauman.
Everyone gets the sales tax cut.
But two groups get a bonus, the
first, working
families, who'd be hardest hit
by a rise in
energy prices.
YORAM BAUMAN: It's going to
provide up to
$1,500 a year for 400,000
working families
in Washington state.
PAUL SOLMAN: Families like Jason
Puracal's.
JASON PURACAL, Washington: Yes,
I will pay
a little bit more in fossil fuel
use.
However, the sales tax drop of 1
percent will
offset that.
And so I shouldn't see a change
in my spending
overall.
PAUL SOLMAN: In addition,
businesses whose
higher energy costs would make
them uncompetitive
with rivals elsewhere will have
the state
business tax eliminated.
Still not enough for Ian
Tolleson, though,
who lobbies for food processors
in the Pacific
Northwest.
IAN TOLLESON, Northwest Food
Processors Association:
We heat things, we cut things,
we wash, and
this is all for food safety.
And that requires a lot of
energy, tax, tax,
tax all through the supply
chain.
And what that does, our products
are now more
expensive on the shelf.
And how can we compete with
those producers
that wouldn't have this tax?
PAUL SOLMAN: We met up with
Tolleson at Seattle's
Pike Place Market, which
featured, among other
attractions, the world's
presumably first
and only Hula-Hoop
guitar-on-chin-balancing
busker.
Moreover, says Tolleson:
IAN TOLLESON: This is a global
phenomenon,
and it needs a global solution.
Is it fair to put it on the back
of Washington
employers and families?
PAUL SOLMAN: But what really
struck us back
in the spring, when we started
covering this
story, was opposition to I-732
from people
who identify as
environmentalists, like union
president Jeff Johnson.
JEFF JOHNSON, Union Leader:
During the winter,
we have been struck with
repeated floods and
mudslides.
In the summer, we have droughts
and forest
fires.
Our shellfish industry has left
the state
and gone to Hawaii because the
acid levels
in the ocean has risen so much.
PAUL SOLMAN: But doesn't that
mean that you
should embrace anything that
would help climate
change and counteract it?
JEFF JOHNSON: No.
No, it doesn't.
We have got an energy-intensive
company, Kaiser
Aluminum, out in Spokane,
eastern side of
our state.
It's the most efficient aluminum
rolling mill
in the world, right?
With just a carbon price, they
become less
competitive with aluminum makers
in other
parts of the states, in other
parts of the
world.
PAUL SOLMAN: OK, maybe a union
leader, however
green, has to worry, first and
forever, about
jobs, even if it means an
unusual alliance
with business.
But then we met Jill Mangaliman.
What does that shirt say?
JILL MANGALIMAN, Got Green: Oh,
yes, so this
is where -- we're Got Green.
We are a community-based
organization in South
Seattle led by people of color.
PAUL SOLMAN: But why would a
militant environmental
group oppose a carbon tax?
JILL MANGALIMAN: Without any
kind of targeted
revenue, business can continue
as usual, and
that's not what we want.
PAUL SOLMAN: More targeted
revenue than the
$1,500-a-year subsidy to her
constituents
and for local groups like Got
Green.
Meanwhile, it was also
surprising to find
out who was popping up in
support, right-wing
policy lobbyist Todd Myers, for
instance.
TODD MYERS, Policy Lobbyist:
Anything that
moves environmental policy away
from regulation,
which tends to be very expensive
and ineffective,
toward a personal incentive,
which is more
effective, is a good thing.
PAUL SOLMAN: A good thing,
agrees Jason Puracal,
who happens to be an ardent
environmentalist.
JASON PURACAL: It's great to put
a price on
carbon and try to move us away
from fossil
fuels, but how do we do so in a
way that's
equitable for all?
PAUL SOLMAN: And that question
may be why,
in the six months since our
report aired,
polls have remained evenly
split, the pro
and con bedfellows as odd as
ever.
Indeed, the only major
environmental group
to back the initiative is the
Audubon Society.
Among those who do not, the
national Sierra
Club, based in California, which
overruled
local Washington state members
to declare
that the Sierra Club doesn't
support I-732.
Aren't you at all concerned
that, if this
initiative fails, in part
because you folks
don't support it, it will set
back the climate
change movement?
MICHAEL BRUNE, Executive
Director, Sierra
Club: No, not at all.
We believe that there's a better
way that
helps us get off fossil fuels,
but accelerates
a transition to clean energy.
PAUL SOLMAN: That better way,
says executive
director Mike Brune, would
involve raising
more money than a
revenue-neutral tax, and
funneling it to clean energy
projects and
to those who'd suffer from
higher energy prices.
MICHAEL BRUNE: What we are
looking for is
a set of policies that will
simultaneously
put a price on carbon, so that
the economy
shifts towards good
family-sustaining jobs
in the clean energy sector, and
is directing
funds towards low-income
communities, communities
of color, the communities that
have the highest
level of pollution in the state.
PAUL SOLMAN: As for the lack of
new investment
money for clean energy, well,
that's just
why Greg Mankiw, former head of
George W.
Bush's Council of Economic
Advisers, finds
a revenue-neutral carbon tax so
appealing.
GREGORY MANKIW, Former Chairman,
Council of
Economic Advisers: The first
principle of
economics is that people respond
to incentives.
And what a carbon tax tries to
do is tries
to harness that principle to get
people to
reduce their carbon footprint.
PAUL SOLMAN: But there is a case
to be made,
isn't there, that we ought to
invest in clean
energy, and here's a revenue
source we can
use to make those investments?
GREGORY MANKIW: If you give
people the right
incentives, then the private
sector will be
smart enough to make the right
investments.
MICHAEL BRUNE: Putting a price
on carbon can
be great policy.
But that's not all that's
needed.
We need to find a way to address
the constituencies
in a particular state.
PAUL SOLMAN: How do you respond
to the criticism
that you're essentially catering
to certain
constituencies here, rather than
independently
analyzing?
MICHAEL BRUNE: That seems a
little silly.
I think it's fair to say that
two of the biggest
challenges we face in this
country are climate
change and economic inequality.
If we pit one of those
challenges against
the other, neither will be
successful.
PAUL SOLMAN: But will anything
be successful,
asks Greg Mankiw, if we try to
address both
of those and more in one
package?
GREGORY MANKIW: People on the
left say they
want to combine a carbon tax
with all their
pro-spending agenda.
Someone on the far right could
say, gee, I
love a carbon tax, as long as we
use it to
reduce the estate tax.
So, what I-732 tries to do is,
it tries to
frame the issue relatively
narrowly, so we
can all come together and reach
a consensus
on this, rather than bundling it
together
with a lot of extraneous issues,
perhaps important
issues, but are extraneous to
the issue of
putting a price on carbon.
PAUL SOLMAN: Last word goes to
Yoram Bauman,
the world's foremost stand-up
economist, and,
given his long environmental
track record,
perhaps its greenest.
YORAM BAUMAN: One of the things
that I love
about this policy is that it
does have potential
for bipartisan support.
It's not big government.
It's not smaller government.
It's just, how do we make the
tax system fairer
and more sustainable?
That's a powerful message that
hopefully we
can take around the country.
PAUL SOLMAN: How the voters of
Washington
state respond to the message
will be known
on November 8.
This is "NewsHour" economics
correspondent
Paul Solman.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to another
in our Brief
But Spectacular series, where we
ask interesting
people to share their passions.
Tonight, casting director David
Rubin, who's
more than a hundred film
credits.
DAVID RUBIN, Casting Director:
The most important
thing for an actor to bring to
the table is
themselves, their own
idiosyncrasy.
And so many actors get
preoccupied with what
they think the filmmaker is
looking for.
And, frankly, what we're looking
for is them.
One of my first jobs was working
on the production
staff of "Saturday Night Live."
I was a lowly production
assistant.
It was the last two seasons of
the original
cast, John Belushi, and Dan
Aykroyd, Gilda
Radner, Jane Curtin.
It was insane.
During my last season, it was
actually announced
that the show would not
continue.
So, we all kind of scrambled for
work.
And I happened to meet the head
of casting
at NBC.
She was looking for an
assistant.
She hired me.
It was kismet.
When I first read a screenplay,
there are
sometimes very specific
descriptions of the
characters.
And the first thing that I do is
forget those
descriptions, because writers
write very specifically,
not for the casting director or
not for the
director, but for the studio
executive or
the financier.
When you read in a script
"doctor 40s," the
temptation on the part of the
filmmaker might
be just to assume that it was a
white male
in their 40s or 50s.
Why couldn't it be an Asian
person in their
30s?
Why couldn't it be a little
person?
Why couldn't it be a Latino?
Gender diversity, racial
diversity, all of
those things come into play in a
conversation
with a filmmaker when you are
bringing in
different approaches to a
particular character.
There are several pioneers in
casting that
opened the doors to the process
in general.
And this really happened after
the demise
of the studio system, when
studios no longer
had actors under contract.
They needed people who were
going to direct
the casting process.
Lynn Stalmaster was the first
independent
casting director in motion
pictures, who cast
films like "West Side Story" and
"The Graduate."
They had searched far and wide
before Dustin
Hoffman, from relative
obscurity, got that
role.
Marion Dougherty in New York was
doing the
same groundbreaking work.
It was about casting people for
their idiosyncrasy.
The thing that keeps this job
fresh is the
variety.
I have cast over a hundred
motion pictures.
When I look at my resume, I get
a little tired.
Just like an actor doesn't want
to be typecast,
I don't want to be typecast in
casting.
So, on the wall of my office,
there's a poster
of "The English Patient" very
near a poster
of "Harold & Kumar Escape from
Guantanamo
Bay."
There are some times when an
actor comes in,
and they give what they think is
a botched
audition, they go off on their
lines, something
goes wrong in the scene.
And often those are the most
illuminating
additions to me, those kind of
organic moments
where an actor connects with a
character,
even though they may not even
realize that
they are doing it.
My name is David Rubin, and this
is my Brief
But Spectacular take on casting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We missed our
calling.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.